---
title: Messaging in the mesh
---

# How to Mesh

<SessionHeader
:goal="'Publish and receive messages to/from the mesh.'"
:time="20"
:tools="[
  'Argon',
  'Grove starter kits for Particle mesh',
  'A partner, also with an Argon + Grove kit'
  ]"
/>

In this session, we'll leverage a local mesh network to quickly send messages between devices. We'll get a LED to turn on/off when the button on a differetn device is pushed. If you get stuck at any point in the process, you can see the code for the completed lab [here](http://about:blank).

### Partner up with your neighbour
From now on and the rest of the workshop, it is necessary to cooperate in groups of at least two participants.

The code you'll write in this lab will live on your Argon. Each group-members should do their own code for their own device, even though it is the same code for all devices at this point.


::: tip Do yo come prepared?
It is assumed that you come to this session with an Argon that you are able to program.
:::

## Setting up the mesh network

> Can two devices on different accounts actually be on the same mesh network? If not, we need to figure out how to proceed. Should both participants code on the same computer then?


## Sending & Receiving messages

Let us take a look at two of the newest functions provided by Particle: `Mesh.publish()` and `Mesh.subscribe()`. These primitives allow you to send and receive messages within a Particle Mesh network. These messages will not reach the cloud. Each device can publish messages to ther rest of the mesh, and each device can subscribe to messages from other devices – this is called a [pub/sub architecture](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Publish%E2%80%93subscribe_pattern).


The same code will be used for all devices in the network, so start by creating a new app in the [Particle Web IDE](https://build.particle.io/build/new), name it *MeshPubSubTest.ino* or come up with a more creative name.

### Sending messages
First, let's send out a message when the `MODE` button on the Argon is pushed.

1. In the `setup` function, tell the device to call the `button_handler` function, whenever the `button_status` changes (pressed or released).

```cpp
System.on(button_status, button_handler);
```

2. Now write the `button_handler` function before the `setup` function.
``` cpp
void button_handler(system_event_t event, int duration, void* ) {
  // Empty
}
```

3. Since this function gets called on both press *and* release of the `MODE` button, we can use the `duration` to check which it is. Replace the line the the *Empty* comment with the following.

```cpp
if (!duration) {
  // Just pressed.
}
```

4. Now, since we now that the button has been pressed, we should tell the whole mesh network to toggle their LEDs. We use the `Mesh.publish()` for that, which takes one or two striings as arguments. The first argument is a topic and the second is data. We will only use the topic, and we should choose a topic that will make sense for the purpose. Later other devices will be able to subscribe to this topic and will get notified whenever we publish to this topic. Replace the *Just pressed* comment line with this line, to finish the code.

```cpp
Mesh.publish("toggle-led");
```

5. You have now completed the sending part of the code. To see that everything works, first add the following line to the `setup`.
```cpp
Serial.begin(9600);
```

6. Then add a print statement like this inside the if-loop, just under the `mesh.publish` line.

```cpp
Serial.println("Button push published!");
 ```

### Receiving messages
On using `Mesh.subscribe()`...
``` cpp
// Define the pin connected to the onboard LED (not the big RGB one, but the smaller one just right of the USB).
int ledPin = D7;

// Set the initial state to ON (true).
bool ledStatus = true;

void button_handler(system_event_t event, int duration, void* ) {
    if (!duration) {  // Just pressed.
        Mesh.publish("toggle-led");
    } else {
        // This is run when the button is released – we don't care about that for now.
    }
}

void toggleLed(const char *event, const char *data) {
    // Toggle the status of the LED.
    ledStatus = !ledStatus;
    
    // Update the state of the physical LED by writing the value to the pin
    digitalWrite(ledPin, ledStatus);
}

void setup() {
    pinMode(ledPin, OUTPUT);
    digitalWrite(ledPin, ledStatus);  // Update the physical LED
    
    // If the MODE button is pushed or released, call button_handler (which will publish an event to the mesh network). This code utilizes som built-in magic.
    System.on(button_status, button_handler);
    
    // Subscribe to all events published with the name "toggle-led"
    Mesh.subscribe("toggle-led", toggleLed);
}

void loop() {
    // Empty loop. App is interrupt driven (interrupt generated by a button push – see line 35).
}

```

Congratulations, you are now able to send/receive messages to/from the mesh network. Easy, right?


::: tip Got stuck in the code?
The final code for this lab is [available here](https://go.particle.io/shared_apps/5bf709ee4a72e15412000614).
:::

